SQL Lesson 1: SELECT queries 101
To retrieve data from a SQL database, we need to write SELECT statements, which are often colloquially refered to as queries. A query in itself is just a statement which declares what data we are looking for, where to find it in the database, and optionally, how to transform it before it is returned. It has a specific syntax though, which is what we are going to learn in the following exercises.

As we mentioned in the introduction, you can think of a table in SQL as a type of an entity (ie. Dogs), and each row in that table as a specific instance of that type (ie. A pug, a beagle, a different colored pug, etc). This means that the columns would then represent the common properties shared by all instances of that entity (ie. Color of fur, length of tail, etc).

And given a table of data, the most basic query we could write would be one that selects for a couple columns (properties) of the table with all the rows (instances).

Select query for a specific columns
SELECT column, another_column, …
FROM mytable;
The result of this query will be a two-dimensional set of rows and columns, effectively a copy of the table, but only with the columns that we requested.

If we want to retrieve absolutely all the columns of data from a table, we can then use the asterisk (*) shorthand in place of listing all the column names individually.

Select query for all columns
SELECT * 
FROM mytable;
This query, in particular, is really useful because it's a simple way to inspect a table by dumping all the data at once.

SQL Lesson 2: Queries with constraints (Pt. 1)
Now we know how to select for specific columns of data from a table, but if you had a table with a hundred million rows of data, reading through all the rows would be inefficient and perhaps even impossible.

In order to filter certain results from being returned, we need to use a WHERE clause in the query. The clause is applied to each row of data by checking specific column values to determine whether it should be included in the results or not.

Select query with constraints
SELECT column, another_column, …
FROM mytable
WHERE condition
    AND/OR another_condition
    AND/OR …;
More complex clauses can be constructed by joining numerous AND or OR logical keywords (ie. num_wheels >= 4 AND doors <= 2). And below are some useful operators that you can use for numerical data (ie. integer or floating point):

Operator	Condition	SQL Example
=, !=, <, <=, >, >=	Standard numerical operators	col_name != 4
BETWEEN … AND …	Number is within range of two values (inclusive)	col_name BETWEEN 1.5 AND 10.5
NOT BETWEEN … AND …	Number is not within range of two values (inclusive)	col_name NOT BETWEEN 1 AND 10
IN (…)	Number exists in a list	col_name IN (2, 4, 6)
NOT IN (…)	Number does not exist in a list	col_name NOT IN (1, 3, 5)
In addition to making the results more manageable to understand, writing clauses to constrain the set of rows returned also allows the query to run faster due to the reduction in unnecessary data being returned.

Did you know?
As you might have noticed by now, SQL doesn't require you to write the keywords all capitalized, but as a convention, it helps people distinguish SQL keywords from column and tables names, and makes the query easier to read.


SQL Lesson 3: Queries with constraints (Pt. 2)
When writing WHERE clauses with columns containing text data, SQL supports a number of useful operators to do things like case-insensitive string comparison and wildcard pattern matching. We show a few common text-data specific operators below:

Operator	Condition	Example
=	Case sensitive exact string comparison (notice the single equals)	col_name = "abc"
!= or <>	Case sensitive exact string inequality comparison	col_name != "abcd"
LIKE	Case insensitive exact string comparison	col_name LIKE "ABC"
NOT LIKE	Case insensitive exact string inequality comparison	col_name NOT LIKE "ABCD"
%	Used anywhere in a string to match a sequence of zero or more characters (only with LIKE or NOT LIKE)	col_name LIKE "%AT%"
(matches "AT", "ATTIC", "CAT" or even "BATS")
_	Used anywhere in a string to match a single character (only with LIKE or NOT LIKE)	col_name LIKE "AN_"
(matches "AND", but not "AN")
IN (…)	String exists in a list	col_name IN ("A", "B", "C")
NOT IN (…)	String does not exist in a list	col_name NOT IN ("D", "E", "F")
Did you know?
All strings must be quoted so that the query parser can distinguish words in the string from SQL keywords.

We should note that while most database implementations are quite efficient when using these operators, full-text search is best left to dedicated libraries like Apache Lucene or Sphinx. These libraries are designed specifically to do full text search, and as a result are more efficient and can support a wider variety of search features including internationalization and advanced queries.

SQL Lesson 4: Filtering and sorting Query results
Even though the data in a database may be unique, the results of any particular query may not be – take our Movies table for example, many different movies can be released the same year. In such cases, SQL provides a convenient way to discard rows that have a duplicate column value by using the DISTINCT keyword.

Select query with unique results
SELECT DISTINCT column, another_column, …
FROM mytable
WHERE condition(s);
Since the DISTINCT keyword will blindly remove duplicate rows, we will learn in a future lesson how to discard duplicates based on specific columns using grouping and the GROUP BY clause.

Ordering results
Unlike our neatly ordered table in the last few lessons, most data in real databases are added in no particular column order. As a result, it can be difficult to read through and understand the results of a query as the size of a table increases to thousands or even millions rows.

To help with this, SQL provides a way to sort your results by a given column in ascending or descending order using the ORDER BY clause.

Select query with ordered results
SELECT column, another_column, …
FROM mytable
WHERE condition(s)
ORDER BY column ASC/DESC;
When an ORDER BY clause is specified, each row is sorted alpha-numerically based on the specified column's value. In some databases, you can also specify a collation to better sort data containing international text.

Limiting results to a subset
Another clause which is commonly used with the ORDER BY clause are the LIMIT and OFFSET clauses, which are a useful optimization to indicate to the database the subset of the results you care about.
The LIMIT will reduce the number of rows to return, and the optional OFFSET will specify where to begin counting the number rows from.

Select query with limited rows
SELECT column, another_column, …
FROM mytable
WHERE condition(s)
ORDER BY column ASC/DESC
LIMIT num_limit OFFSET num_offset;
If you think about websites like Reddit or Pinterest, the front page is a list of links sorted by popularity and time, and each subsequent page can be represented by sets of links at different offsets in the database. Using these clauses, the database can then execute queries faster and more efficiently by processing and returning only the requested content.

Did you know?
If you are curious about when the LIMIT and OFFSET are applied relative to the other parts of a query, they are generally done last after the other clauses have been applied. We'll touch more on this in Lesson 12: Order of execution after introducting a few more parts of the query.


SQL Lesson 6: Multi-table queries with JOINs
Up to now, we've been working with a single table, but entity data in the real world is often broken down into pieces and stored across multiple orthogonal tables using a process known as normalization[1].

Database normalization
Database normalization is useful because it minimizes duplicate data in any single table, and allows for data in the database to grow independently of each other (ie. Types of car engines can grow independent of each type of car). As a trade-off, queries get slightly more complex since they have to be able to find data from different parts of the database, and performance issues can arise when working with many large tables.

In order to answer questions about an entity that has data spanning multiple tables in a normalized database, we need to learn how to write a query that can combine all that data and pull out exactly the information we need.

Multi-table queries with JOINs
Tables that share information about a single entity need to have a primary key that identifies that entity uniquely across the database. One common primary key type is an auto-incrementing integer (because they are space efficient), but it can also be a string, hashed value, so long as it is unique.

Using the JOIN clause in a query, we can combine row data across two separate tables using this unique key. The first of the joins that we will introduce is the INNER JOIN.

Select query with INNER JOIN on multiple tables
SELECT column, another_table_column, …
FROM mytable
INNER JOIN another_table 
    ON mytable.id = another_table.id
WHERE condition(s)
ORDER BY column, … ASC/DESC
LIMIT num_limit OFFSET num_offset;
The INNER JOIN is a process that matches rows from the first table and the second table which have the same key (as defined by the ON constraint) to create a result row with the combined columns from both tables. After the tables are joined, the other clauses we learned previously are then applied.

Did you know?
You might see queries where the INNER JOIN is written simply as a JOIN. These two are equivalent, but we will continue to refer to these joins as inner-joins because they make the query easier to read once you start using other types of joins, which will be introduced in the following lesson.

SQL Lesson 7: OUTER JOINs
Depending on how you want to analyze the data, the INNER JOIN we used last lesson might not be sufficient because the resulting table only contains data that belongs in both of the tables.

If the two tables have asymmetric data, which can easily happen when data is entered in different stages, then we would have to use a LEFT JOIN, RIGHT JOIN or FULL JOIN instead to ensure that the data you need is not left out of the results.

Select query with LEFT/RIGHT/FULL JOINs on multiple tables
SELECT column, another_column, …
FROM mytable
INNER/LEFT/RIGHT/FULL JOIN another_table 
    ON mytable.id = another_table.matching_id
WHERE condition(s)
ORDER BY column, … ASC/DESC
LIMIT num_limit OFFSET num_offset;
Like the INNER JOIN these three new joins have to specify which column to join the data on.
When joining table A to table B, a LEFT JOIN simply includes rows from A regardless of whether a matching row is found in B. The RIGHT JOIN is the same, but reversed, keeping rows in B regardless of whether a match is found in A. Finally, a FULL JOIN simply means that rows from both tables are kept, regardless of whether a matching row exists in the other table.

When using any of these new joins, you will likely have to write additional logic to deal with NULLs in the result and constraints (more on this in the next lesson).

Did you know?
You might see queries with these joins written as LEFT OUTER JOIN, RIGHT OUTER JOIN, or FULL OUTER JOIN, but the OUTER keyword is really kept for SQL-92 compatibility and these queries are simply equivalent to LEFT JOIN, RIGHT JOIN, and FULL JOIN respectively.

QL Lesson 8: A short note on NULLs
As promised in the last lesson, we are going to quickly talk about NULL values in an SQL database. It's always good to reduce the possibility of NULL values in databases because they require special attention when constructing queries, constraints (certain functions behave differently with null values) and when processing the results.

An alternative to NULL values in your database is to have data-type appropriate default values, like 0 for numerical data, empty strings for text data, etc. But if your database needs to store incomplete data, then NULL values can be appropriate if the default values will skew later analysis (for example, when taking averages of numerical data).

Sometimes, it's also not possible to avoid NULL values, as we saw in the last lesson when outer-joining two tables with asymmetric data. In these cases, you can test a column for NULL values in a WHERE clause by using either the IS NULL or IS NOT NULL constraint.

Select query with constraints on NULL values
SELECT column, another_column, …
FROM mytable
WHERE column IS/IS NOT NULL
AND/OR another_condition
AND/OR …;


SQL Lesson 9: Queries with expressions
In addition to querying and referencing raw column data with SQL, you can also use expressions to write more complex logic on column values in a query. These expressions can use mathematical and string functions along with basic arithmetic to transform values when the query is executed, as shown in this physics example.

Example query with expressions
SELECT particle_speed / 2.0 AS half_particle_speed
FROM physics_data
WHERE ABS(particle_position) * 10.0 > 500;
Each database has its own supported set of mathematical, string, and date functions that can be used in a query, which you can find in their own respective docs.

The use of expressions can save time and extra post-processing of the result data, but can also make the query harder to read, so we recommend that when expressions are used in the SELECT part of the query, that they are also given a descriptive alias using the AS keyword.

Select query with expression aliases
SELECT col_expression AS expr_description, …
FROM mytable;
In addition to expressions, regular columns and even tables can also have aliases to make them easier to reference in the output and as a part of simplifying more complex queries.

Example query with both column and table name aliases
SELECT column AS better_column_name, …
FROM a_long_widgets_table_name AS mywidgets
INNER JOIN widget_sales
  ON mywidgets.id = widget_sales.widget_id;

  
